Psychedelics is a temporary immersion
into very intense states of
consciousness where you may touch on
some of the same domains of
consciousness that some of the great
spiritual teachers talk about. They
basically open us up and help us
remember things that we forgot when we
incarnated. They accelerate the
purification process that takes place
where we slough off all of the
limitations that we've accepted as
absolutes. I was being plunged
systematically year after year into the
series of visions that humanity was
coming to a turning point in its
history. We were being taken into a
crisis in which there was a birth of a
profound shift in the collective psyche
of humanity. A shift that would forever
change the future of all human beings.
It's what I call the birth of the
diamond soul. We are entering the dark
night of our collective soul. A time of
intense purification before spiritual
breakthrough, spiritual awakening. If
there were one thing that I wish I could
take from all the work that I did and
reach into my heart and give it to
people, it would be to lose their fear
of death. If you're afraid of death, you
have your entire metaphysical worldview
upside down. The imperative seems to be
to learn, to grow, to become more than
you were before, more compassionate,
more understanding, more intelligent,
more socially active, to stop harming
people with our actions and with our
words, with our thoughts, to stop
harming people. This is a directive
that's built into the very fabric of
being. It's the same kind of directive
that leads to the birth of galaxies and
leads to the birth of stars and solar
systems. It's just an imperative that we
experience within our human species as
an expansion of consciousness, a
deepening of consciousness as we go
through life. Hello and welcome to Soul
Unique. I'm Anu Peter Brandt. My goal
with Soul Unique is to assist you in
uncovering, forging, and navigating your
own personal spiritual path
by sharing the very personal stories of
inspiring individuals from all walks of
life who are on their own unique
spiritual journeys and doing important
work in the world within the larger
arena of spirituality
and personal transformation.
The views and opinions expressed in this
podcast are those of the guests and do
not necessarily reflect the views or
positions of Soul Unique.
My guest today is Christopher Bache.
Chris is the author of four important
and compelling books and one of them,
LSD and the mind of the universe,
Diamonds from Heaven, is what led me to
discover Chris's groundbreaking work.
This book has had a profound impact on
me and continues to do so every time I
reopen it.
I have to say that even if someone has
no interest whatsoever in experiencing
any kind of psychedelic for themselves,
this is an absolutely thrilling and
deeply compelling book that touches into
profound truths and possibilities about
the very nature of the universe and our
existence within it. Perhaps even the
trajectory of life on our beautiful
planet Earth. If not the trajectory and
intention behind the purpose of the
cosmos itself.
It's well worth the read. In fact,
perhaps multiple reads as I have done
myself.
Chris is also the author of a book based
on his extensive study of reincarnation
and that book is called Life Cycles,
Reincarnation and the Web of Life.
And I'm thrilled with anticipation that
we will be touching on some of the
themes from both of these magnificent
books today.
Chris is also professor emeritus in the
Department of Philosophy and Religious
Studies at Youngstown State University
where he taught for 33 years.
He also holds appointments at two
prominent California institutions in the
realms of human potential,
transformation, and the study of
consciousness. The Institute of Noetic
Sciences where he is a fellow and the
California Institute of Integral Studies
where he is an adjunct faculty member.
So with no further ado, it is my great
honor to welcome Chris Bache to Soul
Unique. Hello Chris. Hi Anu. It's a real
pleasure to be here with you today.
Thank you so much for being here. It is
a again a great honor to have you with
me and with our Soul Unique listeners.
Um I had the privilege of going to a
forum retreat with you last year in
Berkeley, California that it was such a
joy to be there with you and
get an opportunity to ask you questions
and be a part of that wonderful group
that that you assembled there. So, as I
think you know, the goal of Soul Unique
is to assist listeners on their own
spiritual path, whatever that may mean
for them, which is of course runs the
gamut um and wherever they are on that
path. So, I like to start out with
asking my guests about what their their
early life was like growing up, your
childhood. So, I'm curious, were you
brought up in a religious or perhaps
spiritual household and what was that
part of your life like for you? Well, I
grew up in the deep south in a small
town in Mississippi, Vicksburg,
Mississippi.
I grew up in a Catholic home.
A devout home but
ecumenically oriented, broad horizons.
Um
uh religion was taken seriously.
And I actually um studied to be a priest
for 4 years. I started in high school.
And as early as I can remember, ever
since I was about 5 years old, I wanted
to be a priest and it wasn't because of
parental urging or anything like that.
It just it was there in place right from
the start.
So, I entered seminary in high school
and then by the time I was a freshman in
college at Notre Dame,
I had decided that celibacy and I
weren't really cut out for each other.
So, I left.
Excellent. Wow, thank you. And so, what
did that lead you to because clearly
spirituality in some form, shape, or
form has been a big part of your path in
this life. It has and um I studied
theology at Notre Dame. It was my degree
really religious studies. And my first
academic love was really the search for
the historical Jesus. I mean, that's
that is the historian's analysis of the
scriptural documents looked at through
an historian's perspective of critical
tools in order to deconstruct the New
Testament and uncover the kernels
of what words actually belong to the
Jesus of history and what were overlaid
by later editors and theologians. And
so, I did a lot of work. I studied Greek
and Hebrew. That was my first
orientation. And I went on to do my
master's at Cambridge in the same area,
New Testament criticism.
And by the time I finished Notre Dame, I
was no longer a Catholic. And by the
time I finished Cambridge, I was no
longer a Christian. And it's not so much
that I rejected those traditions. I just
kept growing larger and larger. So, I
always feel very close and friendly to
uh Christianity but my worldview has
expanded into a
a global perspective. And I I should say
that the the study of the New Testament,
the study of Jesus of history really was
my way out of Christianity because I
found a being of such fundamental
universal import that uh I began to
realize that he he had not been
adequately captured by the theolo-
theologies of the second and third and
fourth centuries. And then when I began
to study other world religions, uh and I
taught, you know, survey courses in
world religions all my life, I began to
recognize that there were other great
beings of great soul integrity and depth
in these other traditions and I began to
recognize these universal themes of
spirituality that run throughout the
world's religious traditions. Wow, we
could do a whole other podcast on all of
that, Chris.
And I would certainly love to and that
that certainly reflects my path although
I've not
I'm not nearly as well studied or
researched in that arena. So, I would
love to hear more about that.
Um
and maybe we can talk that about that
towards the end. I always ask my guests
for recommendations for books and
references or perhaps paths paths of
study or research that could be
of assistance and I'm I I have done a
little bit of reading about sort of the
true Jesus or that the true teachings of
Jesus and I'd love to hear more or if
you have any recommendations on on where
to go to to find those kinds of
resources. I must say my scholarship is
quite dated at this point. I did this
work
in uh I graduated from college in 70 No,
I guess 71.
So, my date my my grasp of the
literature is dated. So, I'm probably
not a good referral at this point. Okay.
Well, I really appreciate your bringing
that up because I think that will be
profound for those on any kind of a
spiritual path really.
Um and with the way
Christianity has such a powerful has had
such and continues to in certain ways a
powerful impact on our culture,
especially in the States and Europe,
etc. I think that would be possibly open
up some doors for them of possibilities
that they hadn't considered before. How
did you end up becoming a professor of
philosophy and religious studies?
Perhaps we can segue to there. Well,
after I finished my master's work at
Cambridge, I came to Brown University
and I made a transition at that point.
Uh
I realized that I did not want to be an
historian of antiquity. So, I basically
erased all my graduate education at that
point and started over again. I started
over in Western religious thought
and eventually settled into philosophy
of religion. I finished my graduate work
as an analytically trained philosopher
of religion in the kind of a classic
mode. By the time I finished graduate
school, I was an atheistically inclined
agnostic. That's what all my graduate
all my undergraduate and graduate
education led to.
And then I I got a job teaching in
Youngstown State University in Northeast
Ohio.
And my first year there, I was looking
for where to take my research next. And
I encountered the work of two people
who'd changed my life. The first was Ian
Stevenson and his important work on
providing
empirical evidence for the existence of
reincarnation. His book 20 cases of
suggestive of reincarnation was a was a
life change for me.
Because reincarnation had never been
taken seriously either in the religious
traditions I had studied up to that
time. I hadn't gone into Eastern
thoughts yet.
Nor in the scientific traditions that
had displaced the religions in my in my
thinking.
Uh, but more importantly was Stanislav
Grof.
In his book Realms of the Human
Unconscious, which had just been
published. This was in 1978.
Long time ago now.
Uh, he outlined
the results of 20 years of working with
psychedelics therapeutically.
He laid out the the nugget of the method
which was followed quickly in 1980 by
his book LSD psychotherapy.
And as soon as I saw his work, I was
very impressed with it and I I trusted
his scholarship.
I trusted his intellect. And I saw the
relevance of his work not just to
clinical psychology and healing, which
is Stan's work, but to my discipline,
which is philosophy of religion.
So, I knew that
I wanted to get involved in this. It was
like hearing a soul's call.
And so, I began my own psychedelic work.
Uh, in the beginning, I I had been
meditating, you know, through college at
at that time and had encountered the
usual blocks that people encounter in
the early years of their meditation
practice. And at first, I thought by
doing some of this LSD psychotherapy, I
could break through those blocks and
achieve realization faster.
Well, it didn't quite work out way. Um,
I chose Stan outlines two protocols in
his work, a low-dose approach to working
with psychedelics therapeutically and a
high-dose approach.
The high-dose approach was really
developed in Spring Grove Hospital where
they were working with terminally ill
cancer patients in order to relieve
death anxiety. Basically, to try to
trigger something like a near-death
episode with them to give them a glimpse
of where they were going.
Uh, and it was very effective. And so, I
thought
well, if you could do that work and they
were limited to three sessions.
And I thought if you could do that work
safely three times, you could do it more
than three times.
And so, after three introductory
sessions,
I chose to work with a
the psychedelic protocol, a high-dose
protocol, partly because
I was married at the time and it was
difficult to find time to spend an
entire weekend doing this type of work.
And I thought it would just be more
efficient. I thought I could get through
my personal karma, so to speak, biting
it up in the in the bigger bites and
processing it and moving it through.
But I learned down the road that I was
making all sorts of false assumptions. I
had assumed that working in these states
of consciousness was about personal
healing or personal enlightenment. I had
a personal model of the psyche that I
had brought to this work.
But after 2 years, I was going into
experiences that were so profound
cleansing, purifying experiences that
were fundamentally collective in nature,
having to do with the collective psyche
that I eventually I had to let go of
that model of personal transformation
and I began to entertain what was to me
a radical hypothesis
that in this work, if you work with
highly aroused states of consciousness,
uh, you
the subject, the patient actually can
shift from the personal
side of things to the transpersonal side
of things. The patient actually becomes
some aspect of the collective psyche
itself.
So, basically, I began this work. I
tried to work systematically. I used
brought all my historian's training and
philosophical training to the a rigorous
protocol. I kept detailed records of
every session. I wrote them up within 24
hours.
Uh, and it ended up lasting 20 years. I
worked for 4 years and then I stopped
for 6 years and then I continued for a
very intense 10 years. I did on average
about four sessions a year. I'm sorry,
five sessions a year.
Which some would say that's not much.
But if you're working with high doses in
a very contained environment and I was
always lying down, headphones,
eye shades, shut off from the world,
attended by a sitter who is managing the
music and my sitter was my wife, Carol,
who was a clinical psychologist. So, I
had clinical support. I had a lot of
logistic support. Um, and I just dove
into the work and it didn't finish. I I
started when I was 30 years old and I
finished this work when I was 50 years
old.
And then I took another 20 years to
digest that work
uh, and wrote LSD in the Mind of the
Universe. Wow, thank you for sharing all
that, Chris. I just just so incredible
to me.
Your your journey is so powerful and of
course, I love how you state that
when you started, you had no idea this
was going to last 20 years. I think it
was 73 sessions over the 20 years. Yep,
73. Yeah, I also found it fascinating
that you had to do all of this in secret
all of this time. And in your regular
life, you were a very well thought of,
award-winning professor and author and
never being able to share any of this
work with anybody except perhaps your
wife
and I don't know, maybe a couple other
people in your inner circle. But how how
did that play play out for you? This was
1978 and the United States had made
psychedelics illegal in 1969-1970.
Uh, we knew that the door had closed
when Harvard fired essentially Timothy
Leary and Ron Richard Alpert and um
uh, and um
Ralph Metzner.
So,
I knew that there wasn't an avenue for
doing this work legally and wouldn't be
legal for the indefinite future.
Uh, so I had no choice. If I wanted to
do this work, I had to go underground. I
don't like breaking the law. Uh, this is
the only area of my life where I've
broken the law, but I just went
underground.
And in the early years, it was just the
price you paid to do this work.
But I found in the later years, I found
it becoming the secrecy increasingly
burdensome.
Because when you when you divide
yourself
and you're allowed to say certain things
to some people and other things to other
people, you create divisions in your
psyche which surface on the they start
on the surface, but the longer you go,
the longer those those divisions begin
to seep into your psyche.
Uh, and it was the secrecy that allowed
me to do this work also became a burden
in in my own psychological health.
Um, so it was an accept I just accepted
the risk. I accepted the challenge of
doing it this way.
And I was glad eventually when I was
able to come out of the psychedelic
closet because the psychedelic closet
can be just as injurious to your soul as
any other psych any other closet where
we hide our being from the world. I
think in your book, um, The Living
Classroom, you talk about perhaps
or maybe you don't talk about this, but
I recall you mentioning it somewhere how
even though you could never speak about
it in class, your experiences
that were completely changing you
perhaps from the inside out in your
psychedelic journeys were influencing
like how you taught your classes and
what you brought into that environment
with you. Can you touch on that a little
bit? I wrote The Living Classroom in
2008.
Uh, so I was past my psychedelic work
and I was in my second Saturn return. I
was writing a book in which I was
summarizing everything that my students
had taught me about teaching in the
classroom and I was exploring fields of
consciousness in the room and I was also
exploring energetic resonance between
myself and my students. And basically,
uh
in a nutshell,
uh I found that even though my students
did not know about my personal
psychedelic work,
uh they began to be impacted by my
psychedelic work. When I would go into
new layers of breakthrough, they began
to experience breakthroughs in their own
life.
Uh when I was going through very intense
uh
purification exercises, they found
themselves being drawn sometimes into,
not all, but some students were being
drawn into intense reevaluations and
questioning of their own life. But I
began to experience a certain porosity
between their mind and my mind. And I
would be reaching, for example, just to
make a point that I was talking about in
a lecture.
And I would make up an example, I'd just
pull something out of my imagination,
and my students started to come up to me
and say, "It's interesting that you used
that example this today, cuz that's
exactly what happened to me this week."
And it so I was picking up on their
mind, and I was picking up on sometimes
pains that they were holding and had
been holding for years, sometimes ideas
that they needed for the next for the
for them to make the next transition in
their life. And this became such a
characteristic feature of my classroom
that I really had to study it. I had to
understand what was happening.
And eventually, I developed a whole new
way of teaching,
um which, I mean, our classic
educational models are what you might
call Newtonian atomistic pedagogy,
because it emphasizes the truth that our
minds are separate from one another. We
know that.
But I developed a quantum pedagogy,
which also affirmed a second truth, that
our minds are interconnected underneath
the surface. And so the living classroom
makes us lays out this pedagogy, lays
out the stories, gives the scientific
research, and gives the personal account
anecdotes that lay this out.
Now, this book came out in a new edition
in 2004. It just came out. And this
time, Suny Press invited me to tell the
truth
about my psychedelic practice, cuz I was
out of the closet by this time. LSD in
the Mind of the Universe was out in the
world. So now I was able to say, "See, I
didn't talk about psychedelics at all in
the first edition of The Living
Classroom." But a lot had changed since
2008. So in 16 years later, uh in 2024,
I was able to say that the spiritual
practice, which had generated these
phenomena in my experience, was my
psychedelic experience, my psychedelic
research. I'm just curious, did you ever
have any students that then read that
that new issue of The Living Classroom
and perhaps contacted you and said, "So
that's what was going on all the time
A few of them have, yes. A few of them
got in touch with me after they read LSD
in the Mind of the Universe.
And there's a chapter there where I lay
it in the compressed form. There's a
There's a piece of a chapter where I
explain what was going on. Oh, wow.
Thank you, Chris. So I could open up
nearly any page
in this incredible book, and I'm just
going to show it here, and it's you'll
see that it's all dog-eared and marked
up, and just I love this book so much.
So I could open up nearly any page and
come up with a number of intriguing
questions, but that would take months,
if not years.
So I'd like to focus on the trajectory
of the soul, if you will, the purpose
and existence of humanity's ongoing
evolution, which you really get into the
book in such a beautiful and profound
way. And it's always so moving, and it
brings me right back to I think what my
purpose on the planet in this life is
right now. Yeah. Um
>> Yeah.
And you talk about a new awareness in
human consciousness that is coming
forth. And if you will oblige me here
for a moment as I read from your book
this powerful statement, and I'm
paraphrasing here,
that after millions of years of struggle
and ascent, we are poised on the brink
of a sunrise that will forever change
the conditions of life on this planet.
All current structures will quickly
become irrelevant. All truths will be
rendered passé. A new epoch is dawning.
There is guiding intelligence within it
that knows the future, our bright
future, and is preparing us for it
systematically. And I got I just get
chills reading this. So you were also
also write extensively about human
suffering and how, perhaps incredibly
for some people, how suffering in all of
its iterations throughout human history,
it has great purpose.
You say the suffering inherent in
evolution is noble beyond words, and
that human suffering is part of a cosmic
plan that was entered into by all
participants.
And if you'd be willing to expand on
that somewhat, I would love to hear your
perspective on that now. Well, that's
jumping into the deep end of the pool,
but let's go.
Much of the work which is being done
with psychedelics now is focused on
healing the wounds of the personal
psyche, which is an important project of
very important project, documenting that
healing.
Uh and it's really important for your
viewers to understand that my work was
not about that. I was a philosopher of
religion. I wanted to explore the deep
structure of reality.
So when you explode your consciousness
and when you unearth the pains of your
personal psyche and you address them and
heal them, and you move into deep
transpersonal states,
what I found was that you don't simply
move into unitive non-dual consciousness
or cosmic consciousness, you move into
the collective psyche. You move into the
the psyche of your species, what Jung
called the collective unconscious. And
in my experience, there the work of
healing and cleansing continued um for
two very intense years working within
the collective psyche, seemingly healing
or working on healing the wounds of all
the
the damaging wars that we humanity has
been through, and all the tragedies and
sufferings that we've been through. So
it just it catapulted me out into the
collective dimension of the psyche, and
then eventually it catapulted me into
the archetypal dimension, and into what
Stan calls causal reality, and then
finishing with 5 years spent in diamond
luminosity. So the whole landscape was
profoundly beyond healing.
It was profoundly um beyond personal. It
was personal, but it was beyond
personal. And so
I opened up into those long large
tracks,
and I opened up into large tracks of
time. Early on, I'd transcended linear
time and began to move into larger
segments of time that I called deep
time.
And when I went into deep time,
eventually, I went into deep time
first as an event as an individual, but
later I went into deep time
as the species. I began to experience
the species evolution
through history and across vast temporal
segments.
And the chapter that you were quoting
from first is from this chapter on the
birth of the future human, which I think
is probably the most important chapter
in the book, because it concerns our
children, our grandchildren, all of our
great children, grandchildren over time.
It concerns the human project. And it
was one of the complete surprises to me
that I was being plunged systematically,
year after year, into this uh series of
visions that I was given about humanity,
where we are in our current evolution,
where we are going, and how this is all
being laid out. For 4 years, starting in
1991, so this is a long time ago.
The series of visions that humanity was
coming to a turning point in its
history, a point that it had been
preparing itself for systematically for
hundreds of thousands of years, but we
were coming to this crescendo of
history. We were being taken into a
crisis
in which
there was a birth taking place that was
a birth
not of individual enlightened beings in
a sense, but it was a birth of a a
profound shift in the collective psyche
of humanity.
Uh a shift that would forever change the
future of all human beings who were born
after this shift. And I don't think of
this shift as something that would take
place in a a couple of years or a couple
of decades. I think it's a
multi-generational
uh challenge.
We were entering this magnificent
period, challenging, but a magnificent
period with all these spiritual
opportunities coming to us, a shift in
the energetic base of the human psyche.
But I had not seen
uh how in the in the world nature was
going to pull this off, because when I
looked around, I saw people walking
around in mall consciousness and sports
stadium consciousness. I didn't see a
whole lot of, you know, serious,
large-scale uh spiritual work being
done. Mhm.
>> I was missing a lot of it, I'm sure. And
then, in 1995, I had the experience
a a rather
radical experience uh after a tremendous
strip down, I was I dissolved
individually, I dissolved into the
collective psyche, and then I entered
into deep time,
and I was given a visionary experience
of what I think is in the process of
unfolding for humanity. And that is we
were I entered a time when I saw that
everything was beginning to unravel. All
the assumptions of life were beginning
to be undermined. We were basically
going through a falling apart process.
Um what we could do for a living, where
we could live for a living,
fundamentals, institutions of our
civilizations were breaking down. And it
appeared to be, and I wasn't given a lot
of detail here, but it appeared to be
some type of global crisis that was
being driven by a cascading series of
ecological crises.
Uh that just kept hammering us and
taking us deeper and deeper into crisis.
And then, when it looked like
we were going to go extinct, when it
looked like it just couldn't get any
worse than this,
the worst of the storm passed, and we
began to pick ourselves up. And when we
did, we discovered that this crisis had
opened us so deeply, that it broken down
the barriers of our human hearts so
deeply and so intensely, that when we
emerged, we found that we had been
changed by the historical global crisis.
We began to find the new bubbling up
inside of us, new values, new insights,
new understandings. And this began to
synergistically feed on other people's
insights and understandings. It wasn't
just individuals having this awakening,
but it was so deep, this crisis was so
deep, that it triggered a response in
all humanity. Um and I think we will get
into it later if you want, but I think
this has to do with some of the
fundamental
uh physics, you might say, of the
collective psyche. What What happens
when the collective psyche is shifted
into non-linear conditions, states of
high arousal, which our global suffering
took us into.
Um
it took me about a year to recover from
just that one last vision, because the
the the
the ordeal of witnessing so much exper-
pain and suffering of of experiencing
the pain that the human family would be
going through in the years and decades
ahead, was just it was devastating. It
was really hard. And I walked around my
hometown feeling like I was walking
around Hiroshima the week before the
bomb was dropped, knowing that everyone
here was a hero is a hero. Everyone on
the planet knew what they were getting
into. They were heroes for being here.
Uh and at some deep level, they did
understand what was happening and what
they were here for, though on the
surface they may not have understood.
There are many important insights that
emerged from the work, but this
particular story of humanity
is one of the most important, I think.
And it it really it If I can
extend on this just a little bit more,
reincarnation had been part of my
thinking for decades by this time. I
mean, I I wrote Life Cycles um in 1990,
I think, finished it 1990. Mhm.
>> for me reincarnation
it's just a fact of life. Yeah. That
we're all reincarnating, all of us have
been reincarnating, and I began to have
experiences
of the planet pulsing with the
reincarnation of generations. I began to
experience collective reincarnation.
And I began to understand it's not just
an individual journey that reincarnation
is about. It's also a collective
journey, so that all of us are are cells
within the evolving consciousness of
humanity.
And I was given other experiences along
the way where I I had the experience at
one point
of all of my former lives coming into
me. Uh I had done years of past life
therapy, I was familiar with a bunch of
them, but I experienced all of my former
lives coming into me,
and they reached a critical point and
they fused.
And when they fused, there was an
explosion of energy that catapulted me
into a deep
transpersonal state of consciousness, in
which I was an individual,
but an individual beyond any parameters
that I had
ever reached before.
And what the teaching that I was given
is that this is what This is the
culmination or this is the next stage of
our long reincarnational journey.
It's like gestation is long.
Labor is short, dangerous, and very
intense.
We've been gestating our next
evolutionary form for thousands and
thousands of years. We've been
incarnating, going back into spirit,
coming in, going out, coming in, coming
out.
But sooner or later, there comes a
point, and I think we are coming into
that point, where our entire history,
all those lives, begin to come into us.
They begin to integrate it into us. And
when they first do, there's a lot of
unfinished business, a lot of wounds
that have to be healed, and we spend
time healing them. But as that
continues, they begin to merge more
deeply, and I
this merger of all of our former lives,
when it hits that critical point, it's
what I call the birth of the diamond
soul, because the light that exploded
from my heart was a diamond light.
And I think this is basically the form
that this new human is taking. I think
we're in this vast collective
geopolitical purification process. We
are entering the dark night of our
collective soul, a time of intense
purification before spiritual
breakthrough, spiritual awakening.
And this is collective. This is This is
the the traumas of history manifesting
inside the consciousness of our lives.
And eventually,
when we work through that, when we
integrate all of that, and when we make
choices
that lead to a different future,
we will experience this uplifting effect
coming up from within us. It's not being
imposed from on top of us, but it's an
arousal that's coming up from within us,
where we begin to live and think
like a soul. We begin to We begin to
recognize that what we are is embodied
souls, and our consciousness really is
soul consciousness, not personality
consciousness, egoic consciousness.
And I think that this shift taking place
over generations
is a shift of the birth of the diamond
soul in history.
And as this birth takes hold,
we will chart a course for humanity
unlike anything that's ever been charted
before.
Thank you so much for listening to this
episode of the Soul Unique podcast. I
just want to take a quick pause here to
be sure you know that as is the case
with every episode of Soul Unique, if
anything is mentioned during the episode
that you'd like to know more about, just
go to soulunique.com
for more information on the topics that
are discussed. And while you're there,
please sign up for my mailing list.
And wherever you are right now, I'd like
to just ask you a quick favor.
Please find the subscribe, like, follow
button, and click it to subscribe. It's
not a lifelong commitment, but it will
help me and all of my guests, because it
gives the signal, wherever you're
listening, that this is good content.
And my commitment to you is that I will
continue to bring you content that will
assist and inspire you on your unfolding
spiritual journey, whatever that may be
for you.
So, yeah, I think so many people that
are doing psychedelics right now are
doing it with the intention of, you
know, personal healing. And very few
people are able to take it to this level
of transpersonal healing or
transpersonal consciousness or
collective consciousness.
And but it sounds like you're really
pointing to the fact that that is where
we're going, and that those who perhaps
are
lingering at the at the end of the line
who haven't, you know, they're in
stadium consciousness or mall
consciousness, that are
sooner or later going to be compelled to
join this journey in a more conscious,
intentional way. Is that Is that what
you're saying or seeing perhaps for the
near future? I think we are all
hardwired into the collective psyche. We
are all We know We don't exist separate
from our the species mind. We are
aspects, fractal manifestations within
the species mind.
So, whether we are undergoing a serious
spiritual practice or whether we're
doing a spiritual practice ostensibly
for our own personal healing, the
healing that we realize and the insights
that we internalize, they radiate around
us 360 degrees. Just like for my
practice, I touch my students, all of us
are always interconnected with these
larger patterns. We distill these
patterns within our life, and then we
feed back into new patterns around us.
So, I think that yeah, we are all part
of this. That was the the fundamental
theme of my book Dark Night, Early Dawn,
was the inseparability
between the individual journey and the
species journey that we're all in this
together. We all move hand in all It's
not about individual realization,
spiritual awakening. It's about now.
It's about our collective awakening.
It's about a collective transformation.
I don't think we can afford to run the
planet as a bunch of egos, even
well-intentioned egos. It's time for us
to grow up. And for us growing up, I
think means
accepting, embracing, and owning the
deep structure of our own life, owning
the soul, accepting the soul as our
primary identity. This isn't an
intellectual thing. I mean, that's fine.
Intellectual is fine. But this is
fundamentally allowing yourself to sink
deeply enough into that center of one's
awareness
where one recognizes that your your your
mind, your qualities of your person, the
qualities of your body predate your
body, and they reach way back in
history, and they will continue to
evolve into the indefinite future, into
the future. It's just understanding
the larger landscape that we're actually
enacting our life drama on. That
idea of this larger landscape points me
to an even perhaps broader
question or encompassing a broader
perspective, like sort of the
this idea or this concept that there is
sort of a directive that we all have
even if we don't know it that is perhaps
born in the
in the intelligence of the universe as
it moves through
the vast cosmos, and perhaps we are part
of universal or multi the multiverses
intention to bring this broader
awareness, this soul consciousness as
you called it into physical form.
Everywhere physical or
some iteration of physical form
manifests in the universe. I'm curious
if you in your in your explorations, in
your journeys, if you had any sense of
well, is this sort of just what happens
in our universe or in the multiverse
that this is the goal of universal
intelligence, if there is if there could
be a goal that is identified that
that we are sort of we go out as a
with an intention to experience some new
part of the universe, some new planet,
some new form of physicality, and a mix
of physicality and and divine
intelligence coming into physical
bodies.
Is that something that happens
elsewhere? I can't answer that question
because metaverse
that kind of lies outside my purview,
and what's going on in other portions of
our galaxy or in other galaxies, you
know, that also kind of lies outside my
purview.
Uh but I think we can without knowing
that ultimate parameters of the thing,
we can have deep understanding and deep
experience of what's happening in this
species on this planet. That is within
our our range of experience.
Basically all the teachings of all the
spiritual traditions, the mystical
branches all agree that our essential
nature
is the nature of the divine. Our
essential nature is our Buddha nature,
our Christ consciousness.
The soul is a structure that kind of is
the more fundamental structure
surrounding that divine essence than our
individual ego is. But the essence of
everything from molecules to ants to
porcupines to human beings is this
divine essence out of which the entire
universe springs.
Given that
we can't die
but the imperative seems to be to grow,
to learn, to acquire, to just to expand
our capacities. The capacities that we
are expanding, we didn't design them, we
didn't make them. They we were birthed
into them. People talk about the chakras
in Hindu system
from the lowest survival chakra to the
highest chakra of unitive of unity
consciousness. We are activating these
capacities that are latent within the
human form. Lifetime by lifetime by
lifetime, we're growing, becoming more,
learning more, making mistakes, but
basically moving forward.
And so the imperative seems to be to
learn, to grow, to become more than you
were before, more compassionate, more
understanding,
more intelligent, more socially active.
This seems to be This isn't simply um
as I understand it this is a directive
that's built into the very fabric of
being. It's the same kind of directive
that leads to the birth of galaxies and
leads to the birth of stars and solar
systems. It's just an imperative that we
experience within our human species as
an expansion of consciousness, a
deepening of consciousness as we go
through life. And whatever we're going
through right now over the next 100
years
it's just a phase. It's just the phase
that we're coming into. It's going to be
difficult. It's challenging.
I think we will make it through it. My
experience, my visionary experience is
that we do make it through it.
But evolution will continue.
Whatever we achieve, whatever we become,
whatever Christ consciousness becomes
universal or the Buddha's awakened
consciousness becomes universal among
human humanity
that's just becomes the new platform
that evolution will push off of and
continue to develop. So 100,000 years
from now, if we were having this
conversation again, we would be talking
about the yet next or other next kind of
developmental stage. So one of the
things that I think is one of the great
takeaways from any deep spiritual
practice, including a psychedelic
practice, is when one encounters
the intelligence that's inside life and
the intelligence that lies behind life,
and actually experiences this genius
intelligence that saturates all of
history, all the world, all the biology,
all the planets, all the geology.
Everything that's manifesting around us
is manifesting as an infolding an
unfolding of this self-emergent
intelligence, this self-emergent power.
We are part of that, but we're doing the
same thing that trees have done, that
plate tectonics have done, that planets
have done. We're just experiencing it as
our species does as does it.
And that is when you experience that
intelligence, and when you experience
the compassion in that intelligence,
that it's motivated by love, it's
motivated by a desire to share
existence and to to help other people
develop higher capacities to participate
consciously in existence. When you
experience that
it just it opens your heart and mind to
a collaboration
with the fundamental principles and
powers driving uh creation.
And it changes the dynamic cuz our
worldview, the scientific worldview has
been it's all an accident, it's all a
machine driven by random chance. Uh it
has no exis- our lives have no
existential merit to them. As soon as we
die, as soon as our brain dies, we cease
to exist.
And that's a terrible destructive way of
thinking. I understand where it came
from.
But I think we're shifting out of that.
We're beginning to understand, no, it's
not an accident. There is an
intelligence that's been manifesting
itself. It's not We don't want to call
it God because God carries a lot of
medieval connotations and carryovers
that we don't want to affirm, but it is
something it's a universal
intelligence. That's why I called the
book LSD in the mind of the universe.
That that the universe is as vast as we
know it is.
But that universe has a mind. It has a
consciousness.
Uh and it's this consciousness is as
large as the universe is. And when you
experience that consciousness, you
basically fall in love with life all
over again, again and again at deeper
and deeper levels. I love that, Chris.
And once again, we're we're definitely
connected in collective mind because I
was going to ask you
what your concept of GOD is at this
point and your journey, and you already
touched on that. So thank you. Yeah, I
don't even like to use the term God
anymore just because everybody has their
own interpretation of that, and it's
often based in
in
perhaps
religious principles that are not
necessarily beneficial for everybody. So
thank you for touching on that. And your
journeys with psychedelics, which I love
how you talked about it move beyond
personal healing into this more
collective form, collective
consciousness, perhaps humanity's
healing
um humanity's evolution. But keeping in
mind, at least for me, the listeners of
Soul Unique are perhaps on their own
trajectory of their own in awakening or
their healing.
And I'm curious if you believe that the
awakening that can be facilitated
through psychedelic experiences
is that akin to the awakening that is
perhaps taught by such luminaries as
Ramana Maharshi, Yogananda, Eckhart
Tolle, Gangaji. There There are so many,
you know, beautiful luminaries and
teachers. Is that a similar
path, would you say? Well, my answer is
yes and no.
And both of those are important.
Uh I think I mean I've taught courses in
world religions and advanced courses in
Buddhism and I've taught courses in
mysticism and meditation. And the great
spiritual
beings, the great spiritual teachers and
masters have always been my guiding
light. I've always tried to conduct
myself in a way which did honor to their
pioneering work in opening up the
dimensions of consciousness that they
opened.
Psychedelics are part of this and of
course many cultures, indigenous
cultures have been working with
psychedelics for thousands of years and
they've all of them agree that these are
what we would call the body of God. They
They basically open us up and help us
remember things that we were forgot when
we incarnated. They open us up to a
deeper communion. They accelerate the
purification process that takes place
where we slough off
all of the
limitations that we've accepted as
absolutes when we incarnate as a human
being. When I lay out the methodology
chapter in LSD in the mind of the
universe, the name of that chapter is
the path of temporary immersion. And I
emphasize repeatedly this is not like
the path of meditation where it the path
of meditation is a slower path, but it
leads to a more abiding opening.
Ideally, one enters into states that one
can slowly learn how to live within and
abide permanently within.
Psychedelics is kind of a temporary
immersion into very intense states of
consciousness where you may touch on
some of the same domains of
consciousness that some of the great
spiritual teachers talk about. But your
stay there is temporary.
Eventually, you contract back your
ordinary consciousness. And if you keep
doing this, you will it will change you.
It slowly it will change you. Never as
fast as I had hoped it would in the
beginning cuz it's a back and forth.
You're going back up and then you come
back and you have to internalize and
stabilize and go back into it.
So it opens you to these territories,
but it opens you in a way where it
doesn't have the same lasting effects as
if you were studying if you were
practicing just a meditation path with a
teacher.
Uh
but I think it is moving us in the same
direction. I couple of things
I really want to emphasize what I do and
say in the book. I do not encourage
people to do what I did to work so
consistently at such high doses.
I wouldn't do it that way again if I
were starting from scratch. I worked at
500 to 600 micrograms every session.
I wouldn't do it that way. I would
balance high sessions with low dose
sessions. I'd balance uh
LSD with psilocybin sessions or
ayahuasca sessions and whatnot. I'd be
gentler on myself. I'd be I'd take a
slower path than I did. At the end of my
journey, uh spirit said to me there's a
path of the dying of seeing
and the dying of keeping.
The dying of of seeing is the type of
death and rebirth that you go through if
you work systematically and courageously
with psychedelics. You go through a
series of multiple forms of death and
rebirth.
The dying of keeping is a different
process. It's how much of that can you
retain? How much of that can you hold on
to? How much of that can you take and
internalize and bring into your daily
life? That is equally as important for
your spiritual development as the dying
of seeing where you have access to these
states. So you have you create access to
these levels of consciousness, but then
you have to internalize the values which
you experience there and the insights
that you internalize there.
I emphasize it if you're going to work
with any type of temporary
state of consciousness like
psychedelics, it's very important to
have a daily spiritual practice whether
it's meditation, yoga, tai chi,
something where you're grounding every
day, every day, every day cuz it it
helps you not only in your sessions, but
it helps you manage the impact of your
sessions on your life and it gives you a
vehicle
for you to ground your temporary
insights into a lifestyle of
transformation. So
on the one hand
well, yeah, it it touches those things
with the teachers, but let me introduce
one other variable.
It wasn't as clear to me when I was
doing it, but it became clearer to me as
I
processed people's experiences when they
were reading
LSD in the mind of the universe so that
now I differentiate three overlapping
reasons for doing psychedelic work or
ways in which people can do psychedelic
work. The first is for personal healing.
The second is for spiritual awakening to
sort of
realize who you are, what you are, to
understand some of the profound
spiritual truths of life. The essence of
the individual is the essence of the
totality. To understand uh shunyata,
emptiness of self, that there really no
is no separate self. There is no
permanently abiding static self. It's
all interconnected. We're all involved
in each other's lives all the time. If I
had been aiming uh continued to aim at
spiritual awakening, I would have worked
with psychedelics completely
differently. I would have worked with
low doses and integrated completely into
meditation practice. Perhaps because the
doses I was working with were so high, a
third
protocol, third trajectory emerged in my
work and that is
cosmological exploration.
And cosmological exploration is
different than spiritual awakening.
And I think the spiritual teachers are
basically talking and teaching spiritual
awakening, to awaken to the divine
within, to awaken to the truth of our
nature.
Cosmological exploration is something
different. It's kind of the philosoph-
the philosopher's quest. I wanted to
understand how reality functioned. I
wanted to understand why is there so
much suffering in the world. I wanted to
understand how could an intelligence, if
an intelligence lies behind physical
reality,
how come this was such and it was a
compassionate intelligence, how come it
was so hard here? Why is it so
challenging?
Uh
that journey took me into
not only into the collective psyche of
humanity, but it took me into archetypal
reality far beyond the the psyche of
humanity. It took me
into some experiences going all the way
back to the very birth of creation
itself, the first Big Bang out of the
out of the primal void.
I don't think you have to go into those
extreme experiences in order to awaken
spiritually to to the truth of your own
existence and to the truth of life. You
don't have to. It's a different agenda.
To understand the structure of the
bardo, to understand what's lying
outside of the bardo, the domain where
you go in between your in physical
incarnations.
To understand the the intelligence
that's driving evolution through all the
phases of its various stages, all of its
phases.
I I don't think you have to go in deep
depth in those experiences
in order to awaken to the core truths
and to purify your life so that you get
to reside
in the transparency
that allows you to live and breathe in
the great truths of of of spiritual
practice. As your spiritual uh
condition.
It's It's a different undertaking. So on
the one hand, I want to say that the yes
is that there is an overlap, but it's
temporary.
The no is that
because of the high doses I was working
with and because I was young and stupid
and and
I wanted to understand some of these
deep things, it kept taking me into
cosmological exploration.
And it would ask me sometimes, are you
sure you want to take this next step?
Cuz once you take this next step,
several of them, there's no going back.
Uh you have to, you know, learn to live
with what you've encountered and I would
always answer yes.
And it would
take me through another death and
rebirth process and enter me into that
territory. So yes and no.
Wow, thank you.
Um
Oh, again, there's so many questions,
but
you're you're mentioning um
that there's the sense of of some sort
of guidance that's asking you, do you
want to you really want to do this? You
want to take this step? Do you have any
sense of what that intelligence was? Is
it a guide or a higher self or You know,
some people do experience uh their
spiritual guides um
in some sessions and some people do
experience a kind of a higher self.
Uh my experience has been different and
again, it would take a long discussion,
a longer discussion to you know,
understand or speculate why.
I experience always being led and guided
in my sessions. I experienced that
even though an individual session may be
completely chaotic and wouldn't make any
sense to me at the time,
over a long period of time, when I put
all my sessions back to back, I began to
understand the themes that were
developing. But that intelligence would
take me into a new area and it would
take me back into it and back into it in
the same session and in later sessions
until I had absorbed the insights that
it wanted me to absorb. Once it was sure
that I had it, then it would take me
into another set of experiences, another
set of insights. So, I always
experienced myself in communion
with an intelligence and a
consciousness, but it never took any
form.
It never adopted any archetypal form. It
never took on any of the robes of any of
the, you know, classic spiritual
personages.
It was always there
and it was always infinitely larger than
I was and I'm sure that
it didn't have to be the entire
intelligence of the universe to more
than swamp my small mind. Uh, it was
just large enough
that I and deep enough that I gave
myself over to it completely.
But it never took a specific form. Now,
some people do have experiences of
specific forms
and I think again it it was probably the
power of the protocol that I used that
was grinding me up so fine, just
grinding me and grinding me and grinding
me.
Uh, and I think in order to experience a
self in your sessions, to experience
deities or to experience some of
spiritual beings or
for the infinite intelligence to wear a
face, to experience a self you have to
be a self.
But if your protocol
completely destructures yourself and
grinds you into fine powder and throws
you out,
then
you don't experience a self on the other
side of that communion. You are born
into vast landscapes uh, of vast
horizons of consciousness
and you kind of live and breathe at
those vast horizons. So, there's a sense
of communion
but not a communion with a
some type of personified form.
Eventually, I I called
Everybody has to have language for how
they language the absolute.
And I call the absolute my beloved
because it awakens such profound love
inside of me. And going in and out of
these states, you know, you go into the
state is a passionate deep merger and
then you come out of it as your silly
stupid self, you know, hopefully a
little better but you're still small.
Go back and forth. The the language of
romance seemed to be appropriate even
though the romance is between yourself
and your own essential nature. It is
between you and you. Yeah, yeah, I've
done a lot of work with ayahuasca and
there is always the sense that there is
this guiding force who that is very
fierce.
I've and
at least in that practice, we the people
that I work with call her, you know,
Mother Ayahuasca.
And it's not a personal, well, she does
have
sort of a direct line into our own
personal experience and what we need.
It's not personal beyond that and it
definitely feels larger than us
and like she has this
very motherly quality but again very
fierce and knowing sort of a higher
trajectory of what
what perhaps our path is and our our
true intentions for being in this body
in this life are.
>> Yeah. Um, so yeah, thank you for sharing
that.
>> Yeah.
Mhm. Um, I'd love to back up a little
bit and ask, you know, so you talk about
people who are perhaps using
psychedelics for their own growth, their
own personal healing and then perhaps
taking it into more of a
a spiritually focused uh,
awakening journey and tempering that
with meditation. Is there a style or a
type of meditation or or a frequency
um, or a cadence of meditation that you
would recommend? You know, uh, I don't
want to recommend a particular form of
meditation. I practiced several
different forms of meditation over the
course of my life. I started with
transcendental meditation and then I
moved into Vipassanā meditation and then
later into Zen practice and then much
later uh, on my psychedelic journey I
took up uh, Vajrayana practice. So, I
don't think it's uh,
it's and if you don't touch any of the
so-called Eastern meditation traditions,
there many indigenous customs and
indigenous traditions, Celtic
traditions, Celtic spirituality,
uh, Native American versions of
spirituality.
Uh, I don't think there's one which uh,
is the universal form that any everyone
should adopt. I think each of us has
karmic ties
out of our reincarnational history. We
have ties to specific lineages or even
ties to no lineage that we're just we're
at a stage in our soul's growth where
we're leaving behind all lineages
together.
So, I think it's it's more of a matter
of finding
a spiritual tradition which speaks to
you. Uh, a teacher who speaks to you,
who awakens the deepest aspirations of
your heart and gives you the means of
beginning to actualize and realize those
aspirations.
And that can be done with in any number
of different um, meditation or yogic uh,
traditions or uh, some people uh, do it
through writing, through literature, uh,
through creating, entering into highly
creative states, their artist in deep
creativity. So, the important thing is I
think
for me
to begin to slow the mind down,
to enter into a clear and clear
relationship with one's mind,
to begin to sever the automatic
responses where you collapse into your
stream of consciousness or your stream
of emotions so that you have sufficient
distance on yourself that you can watch
yourself being yourself.
And if you watch yourself be yourself
and you watch all your habitual thoughts
and your habitual emotional patterns
arise and if you can engage them
without collapsing into them, if you can
just witness them, we find that they
change.
Uh, the knots begin to untie themselves,
the repetitions begin to soften. This is
universal in any form of meditation and
in yogic practice and that is that type
of training I think is also very good
training for psychedelics because you
have to develop the same type of high
engagement and yet a certain sense of
detachment in order to allow your
experiences to take you
where you maybe don't want to go.
It's take you there and you just relax
into it and flow with it. And that's
what happens in meditation, too.
You relax and you go into the flow of
it. Thank you so much, Yoad. I think
that's so important to have some sort of
a practice to to assist one with not
only integrating psychedelic experiences
but keeping it alive in your daily life.
And the people that I work with are
often, you know, come up come up against
that. Well, how do I keep this alive?
How do I keep this this new connection
or this new opening that I've found and
perhaps created at some level or
or been a part of creating, how do I
keep that alive in my daily life?
Because they recognize the great depth
and value and and beauty of it and they
want to they want to stay there
as much as they can. If there were one
thing that I wish I could take from all
the work that I did and reach into my
heart and give it to people, it would be
to lose their fear of death.
Because the fear of death, we're always
told, is the deepest fear that drives
human behavior. It's the deepest fear
behind all of our other smaller fears.
And if you're afraid of death, you have
your entire metaphysical worldview
upside down.
We should uh,
death is graduation. Death is
homecoming. Death is returning to the
infinite source of the our existence.
Uh, birth is when the hard work begins.
Birth is the beginning of the hard time.
But death is the culmination of
everything that we've done and we have
so many
bad ideas about what happens to us when
we die. We're so incul- inculcated by
Hollywood and knowledge and, you know,
terror that's waiting for us in hell.
What a terrible idea, hell, that's
waiting for us and and none of those
really stand up to the true test of
really deepening experience.
So, and I'll I'll mention in this
context that my partner of 25 years, my
wife, my second wife, Christina Hardy,
she died last spring.
And uh, she had cancer for 2 and 1/2
years. She chose not to do chemotherapy.
Uh, she chose to die in hospice.
Uh, she died quietly at home surrounded
by people who loved her.
Christina was a psychedelic journeyer
like I was. So, she had no fear of death
whatsoever.
Cuz she had already been where she was
going when she died. She had already
experienced the world that's waiting for
her. She had enough experience of the of
the love of the universe, the universal
love the universe, that she knew she was
going to a fine place. She knew she was
completely safe.
And so, she had that belief. I had that
belief, both of based on our experiences
and to see death as it truly is changes
your entire experience of dying.
Instead of it being a dirge of sadness
or grief or
you know, just the the pain that
separation always engenders, it becomes
a celebration of a life well-lived. It
becomes the culmination of a life well
invested. Uh and so I
you know, I really wish that if there
were one thing that I could give to
people, it would be please give up your
fear of death.
Do your spiritual practice and read
extensively. There's so much fine
literature, near-death episode research
and former life reincarnation research
and spiritual research that really
should just melt until there's nothing
remaining of our fear of death. There's
absolutely nothing to fear because even
if we've been a
if made some mistakes,
you know, mistakes are we have to deal
with the consequences of those mistakes,
but none of our mistakes are infinite
mistakes that have infinite consequences
and eternal damnation is just a
ridiculous theological excess. There is
absolutely nothing to fear
in death. It's simply part of the cycle
of our life.
Mhm.
Thank you, Chris. That's beautiful and
profound and important and I really
appreciate you sharing that.
Um did you get any sense in your
journeys of that we you meant you called
it the Bardo earlier, that in-between
life state and you know, what what are
we like there? What is our consciousness
like? What is our perspective life
when we when you have truly left the
physical body behind and gone into that
perhaps in-between state? Well, I have
had
a number of experiences of that
territory, but I've also been informed
by other researchers and writers in that
territory. And of course, in addition to
classic Buddhist texts on the Bardo,
uh the levels of the Bardo, two other
people who have influenced my thinking
in this regard at one is Robert Monroe
and his books uh Far Journeys and The
Ultimate Journey. I think he doesn't
excellent job of mapping uh some of the
dynamics of the Bardo, the qualities of
the Bardo.
When he sees thousands and thousands of
levels of the Bardo.
Uh another person whose work I think
great I think highly of is Michael
Newton, past life therapy. His work life
basically exploring what happens to
people when they die after taking
hundreds and hundreds of people into the
interlife state, he began to write a
series of books describing the social
structure of postmortem existence and
the some of the fundamental dynamics.
His book uh Journeys of the Soul and
Destiny of Souls, beautiful works.
Um but the basic idea here is when we
die,
we transition into spiritual reality,
assuming all goes well, that we aren't
stuck in physical reality or stuck near
physical reality because of physical
trauma or emotional trauma or
addictions, we get sufficiently deep
into spiritual reality, we make contact
with other
previously
family members, loved ones,
uh spiritual guides come and greet us,
begin to take us and then basically we
go as into spiritual reality as far as
we're comfortable going.
As far as our spiritual development
allows us to enter into the infinity of
existence
feeling comfortable
uh and eventually we get to a point
where we feel like we're home. This is
where we belong. This is our place. And
there are other beings, lots of beings
there and there's a a civilization of
collaborative a spiritual civilization
of cooperation, collaboration.
If we incarnate again
with a new agenda and I believe we
choose our incarnations. It's not
random. It's it's a choice.
And then we
live our life, we become
more than we were before. When we die
the next time, we go deeper into
spiritual reality and we begin we where
we stop is a more highly developed level
of consciousness than where we had been
before.
And it continues to go on. Uh and in
Buddhism, they say
there are what are called
um
once-returners,
people who have one more incarnation
before they have achieved their final
escape trajectory and then
non-returners, beings who are not going
to be returning or they will not be
returning by compulsion. They will have
free choice after they
uh transition at the end of this
lifetime.
Monroe talks about these type he talks
about the last timers.
There is a reality outside the Bardo.
There is a domain
outside the Bardo. And I used to think
of the Bardo as kind of an obstacle.
You know, it was standing between me and
infinite experience. But now I'm
beginning to understand that it's more
like a security blanket.
The Bardo protects us from the
infinitely powerful radiance
of
divinity or spiritual reality that if we
encounter this powerful radiance, the
the body of God or the mind of God,
if we encounter it and we're not
sufficiently mature spiritually or we
aren't ready for it, it just shatters
us. It just can can completely shatter
us.
It may shatter us into ecstasy, but we
we can't really take too much from it.
We can't gather it in.
We have to be
we have to do a lot of spiritual work
and go through a lot of purification
and a realignment before our system is
sufficiently strong and coherent that we
can enter into deeper communion with
divinity
and stay consciously and stay whole
within that divine embrace.
And I think the Bardo is kind of like a
security blanket that that
allows us to make this gradual process
of entry into infinite consciousness,
infinite bliss
step by step staying within the margins
of our developmental process. You also
mentioned this idea of sort of turning
around the
the concept that I think we've all been
taught to some extent
of the up-and-out. Like the goal is to
to get out of like or maybe
in many circle many spiritual or
religious circles, the idea that is that
we're going to stop incarnating and get
out of the physical world and and move
on.
But I think you also mentioned a
perspective where actually the goal
perhaps of existence is to bring these
higher states of awareness into physical
form. And we think we I think we touched
on this a little bit earlier, but
could you speak around that a little
bit? Essentially, all of the religions
of the axial age, all the major world
religions today came into existence at a
time in history where they tended to
develop up-and-out cosmologies.
That is the idea was to achieve
salvation, to achieve enlightenment
and eventually when that happens, then
when you die, you are free to not come
back to the physical world. The physical
Who wants to be in the physical world
when you can be in spiritual bliss?
And
and that leaves all of the
the theologies of this period, the
philosophies of this period
postulated some kind of cosmic fall or
some kind of fundamental diminishment of
our human capacity because when you
experience spiritual reality, it feels
like home. You know you belong there.
And you know how could you be on Earth
when you know you belong in that
spiritual world? So all the theologies
that development were developed were
up-and-out cosmologies. So you achieve
enlightenment and once you achieve
enlightenment, you achieve moksha,
escape, escape from samsara, escape from
being reincarnated again and again.
But and that I understand that
tradition. I understand where it came
from. I understand how it speaks to the
human experience.
But now we're living at a time when
science is showing us the tremendous
breadth of of the universe. It's exper-
it's giving us an understanding of the
age of the universe, of the
developmental trajectories of evolution.
It's showing us a much larger landscape.
It makes less and less sense to say
the purpose of existence, the purpose of
spiritual reality, the purpose of
existing is to leave, abandon the
physical universe, this 13.8 billion
year project to just to get away from it
and to go back home. But that leaves the
question it unanswered, why does the
physical universe exist?
Why did the infinite intelligence
manifest this body of galaxies and
galaxies and galaxies
out of nothing from its own primordial
essence? What is the role of the
physical universe?
And I think we're beginning to
understand that
experiencing
transcendence and to experience the
reality of our spiritual nature and that
of the reality of the mother universe,
that the Earth is the
time-space is the daughter universe. The
spiritual universe is the mother
universe.
But the goal of the project is not
simply to escape the daughter universe
and stay in the mother universe. The
goal eventually that transcendence is
only halfway there. Transcendence is
getting us halfway on the circle. The
second half of the circle is to bring
more and more and more of spiritual
insight, spiritual power, spiritual
truth into time and space so that we
literally begin to create heaven on
Earth.
We literally begin to create out of the
fundamental profound bliss generating
truths of spiritual reality. We generate
a life here in which we manifest that
reality
in our bodies, in our hearts, in our
minds, and in our social relationships.
So I think that
the Epanov cosmology is an
understandable but first approximation,
an early approximation of what the
project is. Now we are being challenged
to even grow into a larger understanding
of what our relationship is with the
cosmic project.
So truly there is no escape. There is
only transformation.
Yeah. I mean would you agree?
I think there is basically, you know,
you can die and you can go away for a
while but you're going to come back. And
you can die and you can come back and
you can die and come back. Eventually
you learn there really isn't a place to
go.
There really isn't an outside to the
universe for you to get into
because you're always going to be coming
back and the goal is to bring the depth
of your being forward and the depth of
spiritual reality internal to yourself
so that
you truly can live on Earth
but with the true consciousness of
heaven in your heart. And I think
eventually what we're learning is that
you can manifest
the power of manifestation and I don't
mean this in some of the trivial early
approximations of that teaching. But our
goal is to manifest a truly enlightened,
spiritually satisfying, harmonious
uh existence inside time and space.
On an order and on a scale that's beyond
anything that we have imagined yet
because we've still been working within
the umbrella of this older way of
thinking. And the newer way of thinking
I think is truly about living
enlightenment, living spiritual
realization, living salvation right
here, right now.
I don't mean as a set of beliefs and an
emotional set. I mean right down at the
physical, how our physical bodies heal
themselves, restore themselves. So you
mentioned earlier
um
being in a bardo and then perhaps that
there might be a choice or some point
where you have access to go beyond that
into that state of ultimate power or
enlight or I don't know if that's where
the diamond soul comes about but would a
being that is then moved into that the
beyond the bardo still also be able to
or have the desire to come back into
physical form? Maybe that's what Christ
consciousness when it manifested in
Jesus was. I I know I'm go going way out
there here but
I think the teaching is pretty
consistent in that beings who have
transcended the entire system
when they come back, they're not
motivated by some of the smaller gains
that motivate most of us when we
incarnate but they're motivated by
compassion.
Uh they're motivated by the desire to
end suffering in humanity and to help
people find their way to identifying
what the true cause of their suffering
is and releasing themselves. No one can
do this for another but releasing
themselves from their own patterns which
keep them small and shrunken and and and
suffering in that smallness. So
I think compassion is the motivation.
This is the bodhisattva's project that
it's basically to come back not to get
help other people escape but to help
them escape their suffering and live an
ecstatic life, a bliss-filled life here
on Earth politically, socially,
communally. Oh boy, I feel like I'm
going into meditation just listening to
you talk, Chris.
So I just want to ask you just a couple
questions that I ask most of my guests
or all in this case since this is only
episode 10 of Soul Unique, I've asked
I think all of them but
um what would you say to someone who is
skeptical about all this so-called
spiritual stuff? You know, this
skepticism about spiritual reality
represents where we are historically. We
have good reasons to be skeptical. We
have seen through some of the
inadequacies of the theologies that have
been with us for a couple thousand
years. We have seen uh the the triumph
of the
uh enlightenment traditions and by
philosophical uh traditions of the age
of the enlightenment and the birth of
science and all that stuff and that that
naturally
uh generates a kind of hyper caution,
our skepticism on spiritual truth
claims.
And to those I would say uh first keep
reading.
Find good works by reputable people,
reliable people that you can trust. Read
the literature. Read the literature on
past life therapy. Read the literature
on reincarnation. Read the literature on
near death episodes. I mean that's an
extraordinarily powerful body of
literature. I've had so many students
have their life philosophy changed by
reading these detailed empirical studies
of people who have come very, very close
to death and then come back. Read the
literature on on quantum physics and
quantum mechanics and listen to the
scientists who themselves are saying
that that multiplicity of minds is an
illusion. Ultimately it all is grounded
in one mind, one consciousness that
underlies everything.
Uh
read the the the lives and the
autobiographies of the great spiritual
teachers. Look at the what they went
through in order to enter into the
breakthroughs that brought them into the
position that they're teaching from now.
Read the psychedelic literature uh and
understand what's going on there. And if
you choose to participate in some of the
meditation
in some of the meditation
>> Oh, there's so many so many fine, fine
books there.
>> Yeah. And just read it and if you decide
to begin to experiment with some of
these psychotechnologies
do so conscientiously
with great care, with great forethought
uh with um
being very cautious with solid grounding
uh thorough debriefing. Work with
somebody who knows the ropes, somebody
who has experience in these domains
because when you open up at this level
using a a system that can override your
natural limitations you can open up
faster than is good for you. So it's
important to pace yourself, to be
opening up systematically and to by just
be digesting thoroughly. But I
understand the skepticism but I've made
my living actually as a professor
introducing students to this literature.
I used to teach a course called
transpersonal studies where we studied
near death episode
literature, reincarnation literature,
and psychedelic literature. And this was
a life-changing experience just to to
really work with authors who you really
trust and to see where it goes and see
if what their truths are, if they
register in your heart as your truth. So
would you say there are any red flags
that people should be aware of when
exploring different spiritual paths,
communities, teachings, or teachers?
Wow, there are lots of red flags.
Oh my goodness, there are so many red
flags.
Uh our best spiritual teachers are
humble.
They have a an acute sense of their own
limitations.
They're never uh aggrandizing,
self-aggrandizing.
Uh there are all sorts of isms that you
can get caught in and teachers can get
caught in. Um there are mistakes that
teachers make as well as
you know, students make. There's just
lots of reasons to go into any of those
any of these communities or into these
spiritual relationships with eyes wide
open.
Uh and with an open heart though at the
same time, to listen deeply, to absorb
deeply. Uh to look whether a teacher's
life is coherent with their teaching. If
they are if there is a a dissonance
between what they say and what they do.
Look at the communities that are
generated cuz spiritual communities are
intense.
They're they're intense because people
come into this work and it involves a
lot of purification, a lot of cleansing.
And when you have a community of people
going through cleansing and
purification, there's a lot of shadow in
the room. It can be difficult. Uh
you have to navigate that carefully,
conscientiously.
With psychedelics, there are a lot of
red flags. Uh it's it's easier to do
this work badly than it is to do it
well. There's a lot of ways to get off
balance, to kind of veer off to the
side. It's it's challenging, and you can
use
psychedelics to bypass your own
confronting your own shadow, your own
spiritual shadow. Uh, it really again,
it it takes a lot of conscientious work
uh, to use these powerful substances
uh, well, so that they serve you and and
that you don't end up serving them. I'm
curious if you might have a simple
practice technique or approach that
someone could try today
to feel more spiritually aligned or
perhaps more just in touch with their
their inner being? I don't think there's
a shortcut on the spiritual path, and
psychedelics themselves are not a
shortcut.
There is only the uh,
the patient uncovering
of the many layers
of our own psyche, of our own being.
But, it all begins, I think, by
getting sufficiently quiet and in tune
with oneself
to come to terms, to begin coming to
terms with who you are,
how you behave, what you're doing, and
to begin to listen to the teachers of
those who you respect, who know more or
maybe who are a little bit further along
in the spiritual path, and help you
put aside the things that are not
important, help you focus on the things
that are important, to stop harming
people
with our actions and with our words,
with our thoughts, to stop harming
people. I think it was uh,
Gurd, uh,
one of the Eastern teachers who said we
don't have the luxury of a single
negative thought.
You know, it just stop harming, and when
you stop harming, your whole system
begins to calm down, and all the
aggressive impulses that might lead you
to hurt someone with your words, slowly
they subside and your mind gets clearer.
And then the second avenue that people,
spiritual teachers talk about is, now
begin to do good. Now begin to be to be
generous. Now begin to share. Now begin
to just do some good in the world.
That's different than not harming, but
it deepens as you do that, you begin to
feel the ties that tie you to other
beings. You begin to feel the connect
the tissue of life.
And if you can combine that with an
interior practice, with just turning
within,
and letting your restless, bubbly mind,
let it be, but just over and over again,
engage it, follow it, uh, guide it
slowly, let it settle out into the quiet
spaces,
until eventually you you begin to
experience the benefits of that quiet,
the benefits of the clarity. Quiet isn't
the ultimate
it's just a stepping stone towards the
clarity that you begin to get glimpses
of, the clarity that is your essential
nature, that is your true nature.
So,
I guess I would say,
find some quiet in your daily life. Find
a time when you're willing to commit 15
minutes, half an hour, an hour. Work
with your body.
Work with your mind.
Work with your lifestyle, with your
ethics, and don't try to change too much
too fast. If you try to change too much
too fast, eventually you get overwhelmed
and you just regress and you let it all
go. But, small start with small changes,
incremental stages, small changes.
Uh,
and if you can then stabilize those
small changes, then you can take on
another change that's a little bit
longer. Watch what you eat.
Watch where your food comes from.
Or how much suffering is in your food.
Uh, watch your conversations. Watch your
social discourse. It's just a matter of
watching, uh, being attentive, and then,
uh, trying to be consistent, uh, so that
you become gentler, you become clearer,
you become kinder,
and you're underway. You're on your way.
Thank you, Chris. That is just
beautiful. That could be a template for
daily living, absolutely.
And of course, I see all of that in you
so beautifully. You're such a beautiful,
humble,
wise soul, and I appreciate the
connection so much.
So, uh, my last question is simp a
simple one, maybe fun one.
Do you have one, maybe two or three
all-time favorite spiritually oriented
book or just, you know, personal
transformation book? Books have always
nourished me so deeply. There've been so
many of them.
Of course, Stan Grof's books have always
been, uh, very nourishing to me. Uh,
he's covered a lot of territory in his
books.
Uh, the writings of Sri Aurobindo, uh,
speak to me very deeply. I mean, it's
extraordinary that he wrote all of his
books in 6 years, sometimes working on
he channeled his books, and he was
working on several books at the same
time. Uh, very, very deep, uh,
very transformative.
The tantric teachings that come out of a
unhistorical tradition where people have
been cultivating
enlightenment and post-enlightenment
developments of of their conscious
capacity for generations. I mean, they
they it's not a matter of having
practiced for a few decades. They
practiced for lifetime and come back and
practice another lifetime and come back
and practice another lifetime. And out
of these lineages of deep spiritual
cultivation, there are classic texts
that emerge, and I think those texts
have been very helpful to me uh, on the
path. And I'll send a couple of names
your way. Okay, wonderful.
Oh my gosh, Chris. Well, I think it's
time to wrap this up. Thank you so very
much. It has been again such an honor
having you as a guest here has been a
dream come true. Truly an honor, and I I
want to send you off with my deep
gratitude for joining me today,
and for sharing your profound,
insightful, beautiful, and important
work with the world. Thank you. Thank
you. Thank you. Thank you, Anu. It's
been a real pleasure. Thank you for
bringing these conversations forward,
and uh, I really appreciate your work.
I am so grateful to Chris Bache for
joining me today. This episode has
turned out longer than my usual goal for
around an hour, but Chris's answers to
my questions are so eloquent and
insightful, and even beautiful and
moving that I had to include them all.
And I hope you enjoy and appreciate them
as much as I do.
For more information about Chris and his
books, you can visit chrisbache.com.
That's c h r i s b a c h e .com. As
always, it's my intention to make the
resources and information that were
mentioned in each episode of Soul Unique
as easy as possible for you to track
down.
I'll be posting as many as possible of
the resources on the soulunique.com
website, so you can check them out if
you'd like.
And if you'd like to join me on this
journey, I encourage you to sign up for
the Soul Unique mailing list at
soulunique.com,
and I'll keep you up to date on new
episodes, inspiration for your unfolding
path, and other resources.
Lastly, I just like to add a quick plug
here that if you appreciated and
resonated with this episode, I will be
forever grateful and honored if you
would please like, follow, and maybe
even write a short comment about the
episode on YouTube, Spotify, or Apple.
It will help tremendously in spreading
the good vibes about forging a personal
spiritual path,
as well as about this continually
evolving podcast.
Thank you for your consideration, and
thank you very much for listening today.
I hope you'll continue to tune in to the
Soul Unique podcast in the future,
and I'm wishing you well and sending you
highest vibes as you continue to
navigate your life, and yes, perhaps
even your own personal spiritual path.
Thank you for being here.
[Music]